# Question 1 - Expected Number of Children  

## A couple decide to have children until they have more boys than girls. What is the expected number of children they will have? Note that this means that if their first child is a boy, they will immediately stop.  

### Context  
I was asked this question in an OA for a Quantitative Trading internship at Optiver. I was given 90 seconds to choose one of four options, being instructed to "pick the closest value to the correct answer". I do not recall what the exact answer choices were, but they were all positive integers. I ended up selecting the largest number.  

### Solution  
The hard part of this problem wasn't necessarily determining the expectation, but figuring it out in less than 90 seconds without knowing the expectation of a symmetric random walk reaching a given point *a priori*. My reasoning (during the test) was as follows:  

Let $X$ represent the number of children the couple have when the number of boys outnumber the number of girls for the first time. We denote $p$ as the probability that a given child is a boy and $q$ as the probability that the given child is a girl. It is assumed that $p = q = 0.5$. Now, we consider the scenario where there are initially zero children. The couple may give birth to a boy (with probability 0.5) or they may give birth to a girl (equally, with probability 0.5). In the event that a girl is born, it can be interpreted as the process "resetting", but with the requirement that there now has to be **two** more boys than girls. We can thus make a recursive expression for the expectation of $X$:

<p align="center">  
$E(X) = 1 * 0.5 + (1 + E(X+X)) * 0.5$
</p>  

Essentially, if the first child is a boy, we're done. If the first child is a girl, we now need to create $X+X$ children to end up with more boys than girls. *Only* because we have one more girl than boy, the expectation from this point on is equal to $E(X+X)$. We must first have one boy to reduce the $E(X+X)$ term to $E(X)$ (resetting the scenario), and then we must have one more boy to achieve our goal.  

Another way to think of this would be through the additivity of expectation, which states that $E(A+B) = E(A) + E(B)$. Recalling that additivity holds regardless of independence, and $X$ is the number of children the couple have when the number of boys outnumber the number of girls, we can subdivide the expectation of the success condition (more boys than girls) into two seperate occurrences (one instance of having more boys than girls from the neutral position *and another* instance of having more boys than girls), and them combine them using the additive property.

Since the expectation is a linear transformation (particularly homogenous), $E(2X) = 2E(X)$. Some basic algebra then yields:  

<p align="center">$E(X) = 1 * 0.5 + 0.5 + E(X)$</p>
<p align="center">cleaning up...</p>
<p align="center">$E(X) = 1 + E(X)$</p>

Clearly, there isn't a finite solution for $E(X)$, thus the **expectation is infinite**.  

I wonder if I got the point for that question, I chose 16, which technically *is* the closest option to infinity...

