# Question 3 - Cointoss Race  

## Two gamblers are playing a coin toss game. Gambler A has n + 1 fair coins, while gambler B has n fair coins. If both toss all their coins, what is the probability that gambler A flips more heads than gambler B.  

### Context  
Found this in the Green Book (*A Practical Guide To Quantitative Finance Interviews* by Xinfeng Zhou). It's a fairly easy question, but I found the book's explanation unintuitive, so I would like to present a more simple (albeit more hand-wavey) solution.  

### Solution  
For starters: yes, this can be solved using a binomial random variable. However, the book assumes no preexisting knowledge of probability apart from Kolmogorov's axioms and the definition of "mutually exclusive events". Thus, my solution was as follows:  

For the time being, disregard A's additional coin. In the first $n$ flips (for both A and B), there are three possible outcomes:  
$E_1$: A flips more heads than B.  
$E_2$: A and B both flip the same number of heads.  
$E_3$: B flips more heads than A.  

Since both A and B have the same number of coins ($n$ coins), by symmetry, $P(E_1) = P(E_3)$. $P(E_2)$ is dependent on $n$, but that's not important. The only thing that matters is that A is as likely as B to flip more heads in the first $n$ flips.  

Now, if $E_1$ happens, A's last coin is irrelevant. As B has no coins left, A has already won since he is ahead.  
Likewise, if $E_3$ happens, A's last coin is also irrelevant. B is ahead, and A may only equalize with his last coin. Since A must flip *more heads* than B to win, he will certainly lose.  
Only in the event that $E_2$ happens will A's last coin actually matter. Considering the case that $E_2$ happens, A will win if his final coin is heads, while B will win if A's final coin is tails. Both events have a probability of 0.5, so the probability of A winning the entire game is also **0.5**.  

One way to visualize this is to think of the sample space as a line, or bar, representing the likelihood of each player winning. Some amount of the bar is captured by A due to $E_1$, while an equally-sized portion is captured by B due to $E_3$. Then, since the A and B both have a 50% chance of winning in $E_2$, the remaining portion is *split equally* between A and B, thus yielding both 50% of the complete bar.  

No witty comment this time. Sorry.


