# Question 4 - Points on a Circle  

## N points are randomly placed on the circumference of a circle. What is the probability that they are all in a semicircle?  

### Context  
Also from the Green Book. This one stumped me and I had to look at the solution. The solution in the book did feel quite convoluted, so I've tried to make it a bit more clear here.  

### Solution  
Consider the first point, lets label it $i_1$. We draw a clockwise arc originating from $i_1$ and ending after 180&deg;. The choice of this arc being clockwise is arbitrary, we could do the same thing with a counterclockwise arc. The important thing here is that the semicircle that is created by this arc starts at $i_1$, and ends on the point on the circle opposite to it. The probability of a given point (disregarding $i_1$, as it by definition *makes up* the semicircle and is thus considered in it) lying on this arc is 0.5 (cause the semicircle is half the size of the circle, duh). Thus the odds of *all* remaining $N-1$ points lying on this semicircle is:  

$$
\large \frac{1}{2^{N-1}}
$$  

But this isn't the only way we can confirm that all points lie within a single semicircular arc. We recall that we bounded this semicircular arc by $i_1$. But we could also bound it by $i_2$, or $i_3$, and so on until $i_N$. We only need *one single* bounding point to work in order to be able to say that all points lie on *a* semicircular arc.  

Well, we have $N$ points. If any one of them create a semicircular arc that contains all points, then we're done. So can we multiply $\frac{1}{2^{N-1}}$ by $N$? Not immediately.  

We can only directly add probabilities if all events are mutually exclusive (recall Kolmogorov's third axiom). Are these events mutually exclusive? Let's clarify what we are talking about first. Is the event that all other points lie in the semicircle bounded by a given point $i_n$ disjoint with the event that all other points lie in the semicircle bounded by a different point $i_k$? That is, if one point bounds a semicircle that happens to contain all other points, is it guarenteed that there will be *no other point* which can bound a semicircle that contains all points? The answer is yes!.  

Let's say $i_1$ bounds a semicircle that contains all other points (the designation of "1" is arbitrary), that is, all other points are within 180&deg; in the clockwise direction of $i_1$. Well, let's consider $i_2$, the next point in the clockwise direction from $i_1$. $i_2$ obviously can't work, as $i_1$ will be in the counterclockwise direction of $i_2$, and thus, not within the semicircle bounded by $i_2$. We can apply the inductive step onto each subsequent point, until we are 180&deg; from $i_1$, at which point it is guarenteed that there won't be any more points (since $i_1$ bounds a semicircle that contains all other points). Thus, the events are mutually exclusive. Since we have $N$ tries, we can multiply the odds of success with a single point ($\frac{1}{2^{N-1}}$) by the number of points ($N$) to get our final result of:  

$$
\Large \frac{N}{2^{N-1}}
$$  

As a sanity check, we can confirm that this probability is equal to 1 for the trivial cases where $N=1$ and $N=2$, where it is guarenteed to be able to place all points within a semicircle.
