# Question 5 - Chess Tournament  

## A chess tournament has $2^n$ players with different skill levels. A player with a higher skill level will always beat a player with a lower skill level. The players are placed in a traditional knockout bracket, but opponents are chosen randomly after each round. What are the odds that the 2nd best player faces the best player in the final?  

### Context  
Found this on the Mathematics StackExchange. At first I thought it was easy, then hard, then easy again. The statement that the bracket is shuffled adds an interesting, albeit deceiving layer of complexity.  

### Solution  
Let's consider the version where the bracket isn't shuffled after each round. This case is easy: if the second best player is in the same half as the best player, they will face before the final, otherwise they will face in the final. After placing the best player somewhere in the bracket, we will have $2^n-1$ spots left (-1 because the best player occupies one spot, slightly reducing the chance that the second best player ends up in his half. If the second best player is placed in the half that the best player is not in (which consists of half the initial number of spots, since no one is occupying any spot there), they will place in the final. The probability that this happens is simply $2^n/2$, or $2^{n-1}$. Thus the probability that the second best player faces the best player in the final (with a static bracket) is:  

$$
\large \frac{2^{n-1}}{2^n-1}
$$

Cool, so what if the brackets are reshuffled after each round? Nothing actually changes. The fact that players can bounce around within the "bracket" is completely irrelevant. In a static bracket, if games A vs B and C vs D are adjacent, and A beats B and C beats D, A will face C in the next round. That is all. However, we can simply let the matches play out, and then reconstruct a static bracket that satisfies this for all players & rounds. When we construct this static bracket, no player will jump around in it (by the definition of a static bracket), and thus, answering the question "will the second best player be in the same half has the best player?" will give us our answer. Which also is:

$$
\Large \frac{2^{n-1}}{2^n-1}
$$

Another way to think of it is would be to focus on the statement "opponents are chosen randomly after each round". Isn't this what a regular bracket is in the first place? The only differnce is we are constructing the bracket as we go, instead of predefining it before the tournament.
