# Question 6 - Die Rolls 

## You roll four 6-sided dice and multiply all four results. What is the probability that this value is an even number?   

### Context  
I'm actually not too sure where this one came from. Might have been a quant interview preperation book or a quant interview itself. Either way, I appreciated the simplicity of this question. I feel that it illustrates the value of "stop and think" rather than immediately diving into the computations.  

### Solution  
Before everything, we should recognize the following:  
Odd x Odd = Odd  
Even x Even = Even  
Odd x Even = Even  

Let's try to solve for the complement first (the probability that the product is odd). Before trying to solve the question mathematically, think of what needs to happen to have an odd product. If you look at the list above for a bit, you'll notice that any number multiplied by an even number will become even. So it doesn't matter what *any* of the other numbers are, if there is at least one single even number, the product will be even. Therefore for there to be an odd product, every single die must yield an odd number. Since we want the complement of this event, the equation simply becomes:  

$$
P(Even) = 1-(0.5)^4
$$  

0.5 is the probability that any given die is odd, and we subtract all this from one since we want the probability that the product is even, not odd. This simply evaluates to **0.9375, or 93.75%**.  

Pretty tricky question at first glance... I wouldn't have thought that the odds of getting an even product would be so high, and an attempt at an "intuition-based guess" would have failed miserably. Guess it shows that you can't always rely on intution to solve probability problems. 
