# Question 8 - Poker Straights      

## Consider a game that consists of randomly dealing out three hands of four cards from a deck of 12 cards. The deck contains four Aces, four Kings, two Queens, and two Jacks. What is the probability that at least one of the hands has all four different denominations?  

### Context  
I saw this question in a math Discord server. It looks like a basic probability question at first, but ends up invoking the inclusion-exclusion theorem in an interesting fashion.

### Solution  
Beware, the math is gonna get a bit ugly (ie, there's no clean solution like "1/4" or something). Trust me, though, the solution is pretty cool.  

There are two ways to interpret this, but both yield the same final result. We can either consider the 12 cards to be of a single, arbitrary suite; hence, all Kings and Queens are "identical", or we can consider the 12 cards to be of different suites, as is the case in a real deck of cards. The former case would be like treating all four Aces as Aces of Spades, all four Kings as Kings of Spades, and so on. The latter case would treat the four Aces as one Ace of Spades, one Ace of Hearts, and so on. Regardless of the choice of the underlying deal model, the outcome will be the same, as the constituent suits of the winning combination (at least one player draws AKQJ) are irrelevant.  

For this solution, we will use the latter structure, where all cards are distinguishable from each other. The problem can be solved using the former structure, too, but we would have to weigh the number of ways to distribute the 12 cards by their relative likelihood. For instance, there are 64 $(4*4*2*2)$ ways for player 1 to get one Ace, one King, one Queen, and one Jack. But there is only 1 way for player 1 to get four Aces, so we can't treat both of these events as equally likely. To avoid the added complexity this causes, we choose the latter structure.  

This problem clearly screams combinatorics, so we start by getting the total number of ways to deal the 12 cards into three hands of four cards each. Since all 12 cards are distinct (an Ace of Spades is distinct from an Ace of Hearts), this is simply:

$$
N_{total} = {12 \choose 4}{8 \choose 4}{4 \choose 4} = 34,650
$$

This should be fairly easy to recognize. Given that all 12 cards are distinct, the first player chooses four, the second player chooses four from the remaining eight, and the last player is given the remaining four.  

Let's call the occurrence in the problem statement (a player gets one card from each denomination, so AKQJ) a "Straight". If we were to find the probability that *exactly* one hand contains a Straight, it would be pretty straightforward: we would compute the total number of combinations that yield a Straight, and multiply that value by three, to account for the possibility that any one of the three players might draw a Straight. However, we can't overlook the case where *multiple* people get a Straight, as the question asks for the probability that *at least* one player has a Straight. This is where the Inclusion-Exclusion Theorem comes into play. We label the set of events that player 1 has a Straight as $A_1$, the set of events that player 2 has a straight as $A_2$, and the set of events that player 3 has a straight as $A_3$. We ultimately want the size of the union-set of all three players, namely $|A_1 \cup A_2 \cup A_3|$. With this in mind, we can develop the following equation for $|A_1 \cup A_2 \cup A_3|$ using Inclusion-Exclusion:  

$$
|A_1 \cup A_2 \cup A_3| = |A_1| + |A_2| + |A_3| - |A_1 \cap A_2| - |A_1 \cap A_3| - |A_2 \cap A_3| + |A_1 \cap A_2 \cap A_3|
$$

We can simplify this equation. First, we recognize that since there are only two Jacks and Queens, it is impossible for all three players to draw a Straight, so $|A_1 \cap A_2 \cap A_3| = 0$. Next, all three players are functionally identical. Hence, the probability that any given player draws a Straight is equal. This is a symmetry argument, so $|A_1|$ = $|A_2|$ = $|A_3|$. Likewise, $|A_1 \cap A_2|$ = $|A_1 \cap A_3|$ = $|A_2 \cap A_3|$. We can thus simplify our original equation as such:  

$$
|A_1 \cup A_2 \cup A_3| = 3|A_1| - 3|A_1 \cap A_2|
$$

The problem is now greatly simplified, we just need $|A_1|$ and $|A_1 \cap A_2|$.  

Let's get $|A_1|$ first. In order for player 1 to draw a Straight, he must draw one of the four Aces, then one of the four Kings, then one of the two Queens, and finally one of the two Jacks. Afterwards, the remaining eight cards are distributed freely among the two remaining players. We can thus compute:  

$$
|A_1| = {4 \choose 1}{4 \choose 1}{2 \choose 1}{2 \choose 1}{8 \choose 4} = 4480
$$  

Don't forget the final 8 choose 4. We still need to include the free distribution of the remaining cards among the two other players.  

Now we need to get $|A_1 \cap A_2|$. The set of events represented by $A_1 \cap A_2$ is a subset of the events represented by $A_1$, formally, $A_1 \cap A_2 \subseteq A_1$. In simple terms, this means that for both $A_1$ and $A_2$ to occur, $A_1$ must have occurred. This is a universal fact, irrespective of what $A_1$ and $A_2$ represent (duh). Therefore, we can follow the same structure we did when computing $|A_1|$. Player 1 must draw one of the four Aces, Kings, Queens, and Jacks. This reduces the deck to {AAAKKKQJ}. Now, for player 2 to *also* draw a Straight, he must draw one of the three remaining Aces, one of the three remaining Kings, the remaining Queen, and the remaining Jack. Player 3 will then simply draw all four of the remaining cards (only one way to do that). We can thus express this as:

$$
|A_1 \cap A_2| = {4 \choose 1}{4 \choose 1}{2 \choose 1}{2 \choose 1}{3 \choose 1}{3 \choose 1}{1 \choose 1}{1 \choose 1}{4 \choose 4} = 576
$$

As a sanity check, $|A_1 \cap A_2|$ is smaller than $|A_1|$, as it should be, since $A_1 \cap A_2 \subseteq A_1$.  

The rest of the problem is easy. We compute:

$$
|A_1 \cup A_2 \cup A_3| = 3(4480) - 3(576) = 11,712
$$

And consequently:

$$
P(\text{at least 1 Straight})
= \frac{\lvert A_1\cup A_2\cup A_3\rvert}{N_{\text{total}}}
= \frac{11\,712}{34\,650}
$$

Or approximately **33.81%**  

You can also go through this whole problem using probabilities, rather than cardinalities, as the Inclusion-Exclusion Theorem is applicable to both. That is left as an exercise to the reader (one presumably with way too much free time). 
