# Question 9 - 2000 IMO P2    

## Let $a,b,c>0$ with $abc = 1$. Show that  

$$
{\large
\left(a - 1 + \frac{1}{b}\right)
\left(b - 1 + \frac{1}{c}\right)
\left(c - 1 + \frac{1}{a}\right)
\le 1
}
$$

### Context  
Problem 2 from the 2000 International Math Olympiad, meaning it was intended as a "Medium" difficulty question (by IMO standards). The average score was 2.768/7, with a lot of people either getting a 1 or a 7, meaning many people either "got it" or didn't. This sorta makes sense... once you produce the correct substitution, the question simplifies into a basic AM-GM inequality. I liked this question since it invokes very little olympiad-wizardry and can honestly be solved by an untrained student.

### Solution  
Okay, first things first: we need AM-GM for this. No escape from that. So here it is:  

$$
\Large\displaystyle \frac{x_1+\cdots+x_n}{n}\ge\sqrt[n]{x_1\cdots x_n}
$$

A rigorous proof of this is too long (and I can't be arsed to LaTeX it all). Just Google it if you want.  

Anyways, time to actually solve this. Let's start by realizing that $abc = 1$. Since reciprocals are hard to work with, we probably want a substitution that eliminates the reciprocal terms (ie. $\frac{1}{b}$). We notice that each factor involves mixing one variable with the reciprocal of another one, for example:  

$$
\large(a - 1 + \frac{1}{b})
$$

Logical progression suggests that the numerator of $b$ must be the denominator of $a$, as this would result in the first factor having a common denominator (1 can just be written as the quotient of this common denominator with itself). So let's start by setting up our substitution. We designate the denominator of $a$ (and equivalently, the numerator of $b$) as $y$. So far, we know the following (the assumption that our unknowns are fractions just maintains generality; if $b$ turns out not to be a fraction, it will simply have a denominator of 1):

$$
\begin{aligned}
a &= \frac{\square}{y}\\
b &= \frac{y}{\square}\\
c &= \frac{\square}{\square}\\
\end{aligned}
$$

Well... that's progress. At this point, you should be able to notice a pattern. Let's apply the same logic to the second factor:  

$$
\large(b - 1 + \frac{1}{c})
$$

Once again, the denominator of $b$ should be the numerator of $c$, to eliminate the reciprocal. Let's call this $z$. We now have:

$$
\begin{aligned}
a &= \frac{\square}{y}\\
b &= \frac{y}{z}\\
c &= \frac{z}{\square}\\
\end{aligned}
$$

One can repeat this process for the last factor to get the final set of terms:

$$
\begin{aligned}
a &= \frac{x}{y}\\
b &= \frac{y}{z}\\
c &= \frac{z}{x}\\
\end{aligned}
$$

This also satisfies $abc = 1$, as:

$$
\large\frac{x}{y}\frac{y}{z}\frac{z}{x}=1
$$

$x$, $y$, and $z$ must all either be positive or all negative, since $a$, $b$ and $c$ are all positive. Without loss of generality, we can designate them all to be positive real numbers. We can finally perform our substitution:

$$
{\large
\left(\frac{x-y+z}{y}\right)
\left(\frac{y-z+x}{z}\right)
\left(\frac{z-x+y}{x}\right)
\le 1
}
$$

We can eliminate the fractions:

$$
{\large
\left({x-y+z}\right)
\left({y-z+x}\right)
\left({z-x+y}\right)
\le xyz
}
$$

One more set of substitutions left:

$$
\begin{aligned}
p &= (x-y+z)\\
q &= (y-z+x)\\
r &= (z-x+y)\\
\end{aligned}
$$

Consequently:

$$
\begin{aligned}
2x = p+q\\
2y = q+r\\
2z = r+p\\
\end{aligned}
$$

We substitute all of this in to get:

$$
\large 8pqr \le (p+q)(q+r)(r+p)
$$
 
Okay, final observation. *at most one of p, q, r can be negative.* Why? Recall that $2x = p+q$. If *both* $p$ and $q$ are negative, $x$ must be negative (which also forces at least one of $a$, $b$, $c$ to become negative. However, we have designated $x$, $y$, and $z$ to be positive real numbers, so this is a contradiction. Hence, our statement is proven. Let's now consider the case where one of $p$, $q$, $r$ is negative. By definition, each of the pair-sums: $(p+q)$, $(q+r)$, $(r+p)$ are positive (since they're equal to $2x$, $2y$, $2z$ respectively, all positive quantities). For the case where *one of* $p$, $q$, $r$ is negative, we can simply conclude that:

$$
\large LHS < 0 < RHS
$$

Decisively proving the initial claim. 

What about the case where *all of p, q, r are positive*? That's where AM-GM comes in. The goal here is to prove that:

$$
\Large pqr \leq xyz
$$

We prove this through a two-term AM-GM argument. First, recall that:

$$
\large \frac{p+q}{2} = x
$$

Does the LHS look familiar? Yup, its an AM with n = 2 and $a_1$ = $p$, $a_2$ = $q$.

Therefore:

$$
\large x = \frac{p+q}{2} \geq \sqrt{pq}
$$

We repeat this argument for $y$ and $z$, giving us:

$$
\large xyz \geq \sqrt{pq}\sqrt{qr}\sqrt{rp} = pqr
$$

Since all possible cases (all of $p$, $q$, $r$ positive and one of them negative) have been proven. The proof is complete. **QED**  

How the hell do 15-year-olds do this? I was snoozing in AP Calc at that age. This was rated as a fairly "easy" question too, and it took me a couple of hours *with* the hint that I needed to do a substitution...
